### Student Exercises

NetworKit is currently also used as a teaching tool. This section describes the workflow for student teams. Suppose the course is named, "Networks 101", then there will be a dedicated branch `Networks101` for student exercises.

1. Fork the main repository via [algohub.iti.kit.edu](http://algohub.iti.kit.edu) and name the fork according to your team. (On the repository page, click `Options -> Fork`)
2. Make sure that the correct access rights for your team are set. (On the repository page: `Options -> Settings`)
3. Switch to the appropriate branch for the course (e.g. `hg up Networks101`) and ONLY work on this branch.
4. Work with the forked repository as you please. Coordinate with your team.
5. On completion of the exercise, send a pull request from your fork to the main repository. (On the repository page, click `Options -> Create Pull Request`)
6. The pull request is now under review. Watch for and react to comments from the reviewer.

We also ask student teams to adhere to the following conventions:

- With multiple teams working on the same exercise, append your team name to the class and file names as well as the names of unit tests to avoid naming clashes.
- If you plan to make modifications to existing parts of NetworKit, discuss them with the core developers first, e.g. by posting to the [mailing list][list].
- Delete forked repositories when they are no longer needed.



### Reviewing Student Exercises

Incoming pull requests appear as notifications on [algohub.iti.kit.edu](http://algohub.iti.kit.edu). It is also possible to receive notifications via e-mail.


1. Before the course starts, create an appropriate branch for the course (e.g. `Networks101`). Derive the branch from the `Dev` branch.
2. Receive pull requests from student teams via [algohub.iti.kit.edu](http://algohub.iti.kit.edu).
3. To review a pull request, switch to the course branch and pull from the forked repository of the student team. Make sure to pull the revision associated with the pull request (e.g. `hg pull -r<rev> <path/to/forked/repo>`)
4. If everything is okay, change the status of the pull request to `Accepted` (click `Change Status` above the comment field). The comment field can be used to send feedback, creators of the request will be notified via email.

Good contributions from the student exercises should be merged back into the `Dev` branch.


### Student Projects

Students with long-term projects like Bachelor's or Master's theses should familiarize themselves with the guidelines and select a forking/branching model with their advisor.